Controversies and Paradoxes in Statistical Science A Discussion at Boston University Lead by Mark Chang May 28, 2015, Biostatistics, Boston University Abstract: Paradoxes are poems of science and philosophy that collectively allow us to address broad multidisciplinary issues intriguingly. A true paradox is a concise expression that delivers a profound idea. A paradox provokes indisputably a wild and endless imagination. Paradoxes are absolutely a source of creativity. The study of paradoxes leads to ultimate clarity and at the same time evokes one's mind, indisputably. A good statistical scientist is always critical and open-minded. He/she is always ready to face challenges and adjust his/her belief as new evidence arises. He/she always carefully examines new findings and their implications carefully, and separates out whenever it is possible a fact from belief, a plausible solution from the truth. We will discuss the following controversies and paradoxes in our seminar: 

(1) Finding treatment difference without unblinding data We can prove statistically that the treatment difference can be revealed with blinded data. What’s the implication to blinded clinical trials and regulatory authorities? 

(2) Central and decentralized decision systems: Juries’ Decision at Courtroom and Braess-Paradoxes Why is a bad idea to follow our wise leader from statistical decision point of view? How statistics can reduce dramatically traffic jams and improve our productivities? (3) Evolution- paradox: the Shooting Game & Fertility versus intelligence A simple statistical counterexample to disprove evolution theory: Evolution or devolution? There is no intentional collaboration; everyone is micro-motivated: protect himself. (4) Patient's Dilemma - Multiplicity Paradox Why can we fail to make choice when facing the Patient’s Dilemma? You may think you believe multiplicity adjustment for type-I error control, but I will show you that in fact you are not. (5) Art of Statistical Choice What is the optimal strategy of selecting the best one among n sequential options? The amazing power of statistics. (6) Paradox of Fairness: Coin-flipping game How our intuition can mislead us: The paradox of fair game show you statistically that fairness in our democratic society could be just an illusion. (7) Revelation from Simpson paradox - The similarity Principle Simpson paradox make statistician powerless. The similarity principle is the most fundamental principle of all sciences and science is more subjective than you think! (8) The meaning of causality: Determinism versus freewill Every event is the effect of antecedent events, and these in turn are caused by events antecedent to them, and so on. Human actions are no exception to this rule. Many of us believe human actions are dominated by free will. However, the question is: who did give us (different) free will at birth? It is a profound problem, because many of us believe that without free will there can be no morality, no right and wrong, no good and evil. Were all our behavior pre-determined we would have no creativity or choice. (9) Essence of Understanding: Think about thinking A concept or term is defined by other concepts and terms, which are further defined by other words and terms, and so on. How and where will this process ultimately lead us to? (10) Miscellaneous: Implications of regression to the mean in clinical trial: single arm and multiple arm trials (multiple Baseline screenings, problem with single arm trial). Stratified randomization versus ANCOVA 